\chapter{Abstract}
\label{chap:abstract}

Drasil is a software suite for generating software, with a particular focus on
generating \ACF{scs} following the requirements described in an abstract
\ACF{srs} template. The template breaks up scientific knowledge into various
categories, and the abstracted variant of the template makes it digestible for
Drasil. A series of \acsp{dsl} are used to ``fill in'' the template, from which
Drasil is able to interpret an instance of, and configure a generation procedure
to generate software. The template's theory encodings contain a shallow depth of
knowledge, limiting how many ways we can interpret them. To begin strengthening
this depth, we create a structure that concretely outlines Drasil's currently
encoded theory kinds, allowing us to create more domain-specific interpretation
opportunities for them. Similarly, each theory kind contains a particular subset
of mathematical language that is relevant to them, and we act on this
information to restrict usable expression terms to their related contexts. To
further enrich the admissibility of expressions, we also make one of the most
critical subsets, that for concrete theory transcription, type-safe by building
a bidirectional type-checker and system of type rules. The type-checker shows
considerable success highlighting previously undiscovered instances of ill-typed
expressions in Drasil's case studies. Finally, as Drasil relies on a plethora of
different types of knowledge, it needs a place to store them. Thus, we create a
system to store any instance of any type of knowledge in Drasil's memory bank of
knowledge by creating a universal type carrier.
