Information Encoding and Traceability in Scientific Computing Software

In the field of scientific computing software, there exists much discourse over the best method to develop new programs and related artifacts. Compared to flexible procedures such as a knowledge acquisition process for creating software, many scientists approach rigid and structured methods with more apprehension due to a lack of specific up-front requirements and the heavy cost of synchronizing information between artifacts. However, given the right tools, using a rational document-driven design process may prove to be more efficient at creating scientific computing software, thus reducing time and improving productivity. In other words, this project aims to implement the benefits of a rational document-driven design process without the drawbacks of information duplication, desynchronization, and irrelevant documentation in scientific computing software. [1]

The Drasil framework is a knowledge-based approach to scientific software development. It can generate Software Requirement Specification (SRS) documents along with object-oriented programs that will solve a problem outlined in the generated SRS. By improving this framework, we can allow for variation in the types of generated documents and increase the amount of information that Drasil can use. The increase in meaningful information allows for Drasil to detect and display relationships between pieces of data. For example, in a scientific document, Drasil can show the dependency of a mathematical expression on assumptions outlined in the SRS. But most importantly, the ability to “teach” Drasil about scientific topics grants it the power to apply and contrast any new information against its existing information. Drasil also helps to catch mistakes such as type errors in expressions, occurrences of isolated information, and even human errors like spelling and grammar. Through the development of the Drasil framework, we have successfully encoded knowledge and granted traceability of such knowledge while using a structured method based on relevant documentation. While the process is not as flexible (i.e., compared to a program like LaTeX, modifying the SRS from its standard structure may be more difficult), using Drasil to generate documents with consistent structure is much more efficient and completely removes any need for duplicating and synchronizing information.

Reference:
[1] Daniel Szymczak, W. Spencer Smith, and Jacques Carette. Position paper: A knowledge-based approach to scientific software development. In Proceedings of SE4Science’16 in conjunction with the International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), Austin, Texas, United States, May 2016. In conjunction with ICSE 2016. 4 pp.
