\chapter{Drasil}
\label{chap:drasil}

\begin{writingdirectives}

      \item What is Drasil?
      \begin{enumerate}
            \item What does it do?
            \item Where can we find information about it?
            \item What are its successes?
      \end{enumerate}

      \item How does Drasil work?
      \begin{enumerate}
            \item SRS? Generation?
            \item Specifically, what are its current problems?
      \end{enumerate}

\end{writingdirectives}

In this chapter, we will discuss the project this work contributes to, Drasil.
Specifically, we will discuss at a high-level what Drasil is capable of, and how
it works.

\drasilLogoImg{}

\section{What is it? What can it do?}
\label{chap:drasil:sec:what-is-it-what-can-it-do}

Principally investigated by \porthref{Dr.\ Jacques
      Carette}{https://www.cas.mcmaster.ca/~carette/} and \porthref{Dr.\ Spencer
      Smith}{https://www.cas.mcmaster.ca/~smiths/},
\porthref{Drasil}{https://jacquescarette.github.io/Drasil/} is a software suite
for generating software for well-understood problems through a knowledge-first
approach \cite{Drasil2021}. Drasil captures the background knowledge involved
with software development to make it \textit{reusable}, improve
\textit{maintainability} of software, and strengthen \textit{traceability}
between desired ``software artifacts''\footnote{``Software artifacts'' being any
      file with a well-defined structure, such as plaintext files, Python code,
      \LaTeX{} code, \acs{html}, or \acs{json}.} and the background knowledge
\cite{SzymczakEtAl2016}. Currently, Drasil focuses on generating software
artifacts for \ACF{scs}, where it has been shown to improve software qualities,
such as \textit{verifiability}, \textit{reliability}, and \textit{usability}
\cite{Smith2018}.

\caseStudiesTable{}

Drasil's knowledge-capture approach to software development allows users to
remove themselves from the discussion of ``code'' and focus on the important
bits: the problem the code solves and how ``code'' ultimately relates to
it\footnote{Drasil allows users to ``keep at a safe distance'' from software,
but only so far as Drasil has encoded the terminology the users rely on for
conveying their problem to Drasil.}. Drasil's development is navigated through a
series of case studies: \refCaseStudiesTable{}. Each case study has users input
scientific problems using \acsp{dsl} that build up an abstract \ACF{srs}
\cite{SmithAndLai2005}. The \acs{srs} decomposes scientific problems into small
structured fragments of knowledge that have direct relations to ``code'' and can
be used flexibly as part of code generation. Through abstracting sufficient
depth and breadth of the knowledge in an \acs{srs} (e.g., including the inputs,
outputs, and calculation scheme), Drasil is able to generate software artifacts
that satisfy the designated \acs{srs}\footnote{It is helpful to think of the
\acs{srs} as a sort of ``recipe'' that Drasil follows to navigate the
generation.} (\refCaseStudiesCodeTable{}). Drasil relies on the capture of a
\textit{network of domains} \cite{Czarnecki2005} to generate artifacts. Roughly,
the network of domains related to the code generated related to an abstracted
\acs{srs} is as per \refRoughNetworkOfDomains{}\footnote{Note that this is not
representative of all knowledge captured in Drasil, but only that which is
relevant to generating code for a given \acs{srs} abstraction.}, where nodes are
the major categories of domains\footnote{In other words, each node contains its
own subdomain as well} and arrows are mappings between them. The current network
is built according to the needs of Drasil's case studies. One notable success of
the knowledge capture is the reusability of it to regenerate artifacts in
different, but similarly applicable, languages. For example, the \acs{glassbr}
case study had \porthref{software
artifacts}{https://github.com/smiths/caseStudies/tree/master/CaseStudies/glass}
manually built. Once the knowledge was codified in Drasil, the same knowledge
allows re-creation in \porthref{other
languages}{https://github.com/JacquesCarette/Drasil/tree/master/code/stable/glassbr}.

\roughNetworkOfDomains{}

Drasil is able to generate a host of \ACF{oo} programming language source codes
through compiling to \ACF{gool} \cite{Carette2019,MacLachlan2020}, which
compiles to several \acs{oo} languages (such as Java, Python, C/C$++$, C\#, and
Swift\footnote{Note that Swift was not discussed in \cite{MacLachlan2020}, but
      the renderer was built by Brooks as well.}). Drasil also contains renderers for
printing \acs{html} files, Makefiles, basic Markdown (enough for ``READMEs''),
GraphViz DOT \cite{Gansner1993} diagrams, and plaintext, \LaTeX{} documents.
\acs{srs} abstractions are renderable in either \LaTeX{} or \acs{html}.

\caseStudiesCodeTable{}

\section{How does it work? How is it used?}
\label{chap:drasil:sec:how-does-it-work-how-is-it-used}

As mentioned in \Cref{chap:drasil:sec:what-is-it-what-can-it-do}, Drasil relies
on building a tree of knowledge that contains sufficient information such that
software artifacts can be ``grown'' from them. The individual pieces of
knowledge are known as \textit{chunks} and are encoded as either \ACFP{adt} or
\ACFP{gadt}. Drasil, and all knowledge captured in Drasil, is deeply embedded in
Haskell \cite{Haskell2010} \porthref{source
      code}{https://github.com/JacquesCarette/Drasil/}\footnote{The source code
      compiles against \acs{ghc} 8.8.4 \cite{GHC884} and uses \acs{ghc} language
      extensions.}. Each chunk has a \textit{type} which defines its structural
information. Chunks contain information encoded with various \ACFP{dsl}. The
network of domains (roughly, \refRoughNetworkOfDomains{}) is made up of a series
of chunks connecting and discussing one another, similar to how we might discuss
abstract concepts.

The ``coherent \acs{srs} abstraction'' of \refRoughNetworkOfDomains{} is
modelled after the \textit{Smith et al.} formal \acs{srs} template
\cite{SmithAndLai2005}, while the ``scientific knowledge'' higher up is a set of
interconnected chunks (and, hence, \acsp{dsl}). The ``scientific knowledge''
chunks are used to fill in the ``gaps'' of the \acs{srs} template. For example,
if we wanted to encode a variable, \(\hat{q}_{\text{tol}}\), representing a real
number, ``Tolerable load,'' we might write it as
\refOriginalQuantityDictExampleHaskell{}, where it is of type \QuantityDict{}
(\refOriginalQuantityDictHaskell{}\footnote{Note that \IdeaDict{}, \Space{},
\Symbol{} (for all \Stage{}s), and \UnitDefn{} are coupled together to create
the quantity. The components respectively define the term, type, symbol
(dependent on the usage context [equational or software implementation]), and
unit of the quantity.}), the type of variable encodings.

\originalQuantityDictExampleHaskell{}

\originalQuantityDictHaskell{}

Notably, in \refOriginalQuantityDictExampleHaskell{}, the symbol,
\(\hat{q}_{\text{tol}}\), is built using a \Symbol{} \acs{dsl}. The capture of
domain-specific knowledge is what sets \acsp{dsl} apart from general-purpose
programming languages. Domain-specific abstractions create opportunities for
domain-specific \textit{interpretation and transformation} (e.g., optimization,
analysis, error checking, tool support, etc.) \cite{Czarnecki2005}. For example,
with the symbol for ``tolerable load,'' we have information about the structure
of the symbol itself: that ``q'' has a ``hat'' and a subscript ``tol.'' From
this, we can output the same information in alternative flavours if we desired,
such as plain text, or with Java-compatible naming convention (e.g.,
``qHatTol'').

Drasil's \acs{srs} template contains more ``holes''\footnote{Or ``blanks'' if you
      think of the template as a ``fill-in-the-blanks'' puzzle.} for other
information necessary to creating a whole ``story'' about how
\textit{output variables} can be calculated according to a set of
\textit{input variables} and algorithm derived through a series of
\textit{theories}. With sufficient knowledge \textit{depth}\footnote{Note
      that the \acs{srs} template provides the \textit{breadth} needed by
      design!} for each relevant fragment, Drasil is able to automatically
``check'' it for consistency and coherence, and generate representational
code\footnote{``Representational code'' meaning software that solves the
      problem the related \acs{srs} abstraction describes, using the algorithm
      outlined.}.

Unfortunately, not all of Drasil's case studies are capable of generating
representational code (\refCaseStudiesCodeTable{}). Some case studies
(\acs{gamephysics}, \acs{hghc}, and \acs{ssp}) are still actively being
developed, but are left incomplete at the time of writing. \acs{nopcm} is usable
in all languages supported by \acs{gool} except for Swift due to the lack of a
Drasil-supported \acs{ode} solving library for the Swift \acs{gool} renderer.
\acs{pdcontroller} was built \cite{DrasilPR2289Naveen} outside the normal means
of Drasil's case study development. Code generation for \acs{pdcontroller} is
not impossible (it's done for Python), it just requires more investigation by a
domain expert for the needs of compiling to more languages. However, both the
issues related to \acs{nopcm} and \acs{pdcontroller} are outside the scope of
this work. In this work, we will focus on a critical common denominator between
all examples: capturing mathematical knowledge for reliable \acs{srs} artifact
generation. In particular, we will focus on 2 primary aspects of mathematical
knowledge: the \textit{theories} and the \textit{expressions}.
