# Terminology and Definitions {#Sec:TermDefs}

This subsection provides a list of terms that are used in the subsequent sections and their meaning, with the purpose of reducing ambiguity and making it easier to correctly understand the requirements. All of the terms are extracted from [astm2009](./SecReferences.md#astm2009).

1. Glass breakage - The fracture or breakage of any lite or ply in monolithic, laminated, or insulating glass.
2. Lateral - Perpendicular to the glass surface.
3. Lite - Pieces of glass that are cut, prepared, and used to create the window or door.
4. Specifying authority - The design professional responsible for interpreting applicable regulations of authorities having jurisdiction and considering appropriate site specific factors to determine the appropriate values used to calculate the specified design load, and furnishing other information required to perform this practice.
5. Blast resistant glazing - Glazing that provides protection against air blast pressure generated by explosions.
6. Equivalent TNT charge mass - Mass of TNT placed on the ground in a hemisphere that represents the design explosive threat.
7. Glass Type:
   - Annealed (AN) - A flat, monolithic, glass lite which has uniform thickness where the residual surface stresses are almost zero, as defined in [astm2016](./SecReferences.md#astm2016).
   - Fully tempered (FT) - A flat, monolithic, glass lite of uniform thickness that has been subjected to a special heat treatment process where the residual surface compression is not less than 69 MPa (10 000 psi) or the edge compression not less than 67 MPa (9700 psi), as defined in [astm2012](./SecReferences.md#astm2012).
   - Heat strengthened (HS) - A flat, monolithic, glass lite of uniform thickness that has been subjected to a special heat treatment process where the residual surface compression is not less than 24 MPa (3500psi) or greater than 52 MPa (7500 psi), as defined in [astm2012](./SecReferences.md#astm2012).
8. Applied load (demand) or pressure - A uniformly distributed lateral pressure.
   - Load resistance (LR) - The uniform lateral load that a glass construction can sustain based upon a given probability of breakage and load duration as defined in [astm2009](./SecReferences.md#astm2009) (pp. 1 and 53).
   - Non-factored load (NFL) - Three second duration uniform load associated with a probability of breakage less than or equal to 8 lites per 1000 for monolithic AN glass.
   - Glass weight load - The dead load component of the glass weight.
   - Short duration load - Any load lasting 3 seconds or less.
   - Specified design load - The magnitude in Pa (psf), type (for example, wind or snow) and duration of the load given by the specifying authority.
   - Long duration load - Any load lasting approximately 30 days.
9. Stand off distance (SD) - The distance from the glazing surface to the centroid of a hemispherical high explosive charge. It is represented by the coordinates (\\({\mathit{SD}\_{\text{x}}}\\), \\({\mathit{SD}\_{\text{y}}}\\), \\({\mathit{SD}\_{\text{z}}}\\)).
10. Load share factor (LSF) - A multiplying factor derived from the load sharing between the double glazing, of equal or different thicknesses and types (including the layered behaviour of LG under long duration loads), in a sealed IG unit.
11. Glass type factor (GTF) - A multiplying factor for adjusting the LR of different glass type, that is, AN, FT, or HS, in monolithic glass, LG (Laminated Glass), or IG (Insulating Glass) constructions.
12. Aspect ratio (AR) - The ratio of the long dimension of the glass to the short dimension of the glass. For glass supported on four sides, the aspect ratio is always equal to or greater than 1.0. For glass supported on three sides, the ratio of the length of one of the supported edges perpendicular to the free edge, to the length of the free edge, is equal to or greater than 0.5.
13. Probability of breakage (\\({P\_{\text{b}}}\\)) - The fraction of glass lites or plies that would break at the first occurrence of a specified load and duration, typically expressed in lites per 1000 ([astm2016](./SecReferences.md#astm2016)).
